---
title: 'Deceiving the South through its Literature'
description: ''
date: '2021-01-21'
tags: ['Southern Literature']
---

John Kennedy’s book *Swallow Barn* was an effective “antidote to the abolition mischief” and ultimately deceived the South. Kennedy portrays the plantation as an evolution of feudalism, depicts plantation life as mutually beneficial and positive for everyone, and diminishes the humanity of enslaved persons. By misinforming the South, Kennedy contributes to the continuation of the institution of American slavery and leads to the American Civil War. 

<!--more-->

One component of Kennedy’s antidote is the depiction of the plantation as an extension of European feudalism in the peaceful southern countryside. At first, the northern visitor establishes the country as a serene paradise that “wears a country look” (Kennedy 309). As such, he provides beautiful imagery that describes the surrounding area: 

> The skies have a deeper blue, the clouds rest upon them like painting. The soft flutter of the groves hushes one into silence. The chirp of the grasshopper, as he leaps in his short semi-circles along your path, has the feebleness of a whisper; and the great vagabond butterfly, which gads amongst the thistles, moves noiseless as a straggling leaf borne upon a zephyr \\[...] and a choir of locusts in the neighboring woods spin out a long stave of music, like the pupils of a singing-school practising the elements of psalmody. Still, this varied concert falls faintly upon the ear, and only seems to measure silence. (Kennedy 308)

By illustrating the South as a quiet and comfortable utopia, Kennedy supports the second half of this part of the antidote. To Kennedy, the southern plantation is an evolution of European feudalism. The master of the house is portrayed as a noble, hardworking individual who wakes up earlier than the rest of the estate and cares deeply for the plantation. Despite this dedication, Kennedy notes that Frank Meriwether is a well-educated gentleman and avid reader who still finds time for his family (Kennedy 309). Additionally, the rest of the family is portrayed as noble, with the daughters diligently pursuing piano and Ned conversing with guests about agriculture and manly sports (Kennedy 309). 

To support his thesis that the plantation is an evolution of European feudalism, he never describes the enslaved persons as slaves. Rather, Kennedy specifically calls them serfs, a staple of European feudalism (Kennedy 311). While this distinction may appear trivial, the institution of American slavery is far worse than serfdom present in Western Europe. Serfs are specifically tied to the land and are more akin to sharecroppers. Additionally, many of the cornerstones of the institution of American slavery are absent in European serfdom, such as the forced separation of enslaved families and the indignity of being a slave in the United States. By calling these enslaved individuals serfs, Kennedy not only diminishes their adversity in the eyes of readers but also elevates the Meriwethers to nobility, likening them to European lords. 

In addition to defining the plantation as a natural evolution of European feudalism, Kennedy describes the plantation as a merry and laid-back place for both the family and the “serfs.” Kennedy writes that the family goes on strolls across the plantation and admiring nature, noting that they were “sometimes a good deal perplexed to know what \\[to] do until dinner time” (Kennedy 309). In addition, he notes that the family finds great amusement in the activities of the enslaved individuals, and they are reported to equally enjoy the distractions that are conceived by the family (Kennedy 310-312).

One such instance of entertainment was provided by enslaved children “who were darting about the bushes like untamed monkeys” (Kennedy 309). When this amusement waned, the Meriwethers concocted their own entertainment and ordered the slaves to participate. Kennedy writes that Ned Meriwether ordered a footrace and offered up a “piece of money to the winner” (Kennedy 310). He describes the racers as very lively and in good spirits. In the end, Ned thoroughly enjoyed the event and throws a pouch of money in the air for the racers to collect (Kennedy 311). Kennedy orchestrates this scene to depict a mutual enjoyment of life while at the same time portraying the generosity of the “noble” family. This ingenious portrayal of an enjoyable livelihood and generosity reinforces another theme of Anti-Tom literature: “slaves and masters enjoy a mutually supportive, familial bond” (Katowich, slide 17). As such, this scene is very effective as an antidote to the abolitionist movement. 

The final pillar of Kennedy’s antidote is the portrayal of the enslaved people as sub-human. Namely, the enslaved children are likened to a herd of livestock who “\\[dart] about the bushes like untamed monkeys” (Kennedy 309). Additionally, the racers are described as “a strange pack of antic and careless animals” and, once they encounter the water, as a “brood of ducks” (Kennedy 310-311). Unlike many other works of Anti-Tom literature, Swallow Barn portrays slaves not as children but as animals (Katowich, slide 17). To modern readers, a valid thought arises: if the Meriwethers elevated themselves to feudal nobility through their “serfs,” what happens to their position when their “serfs” are nothing more than animals in the eyes of the family? 

John Kennedy’s Swallow Barn is a terrifying piece of southern propaganda. Kennedy distorts southern plantations as a natural evolution of European feudalism by calling the enslaved people “serfs,” effectively elevating the Meriwethers to nobility. Additionally, he illustrates the plantation as a peaceful piece of southern countryside where everyone is happy and has fun every day. Finally, Kennedy degrades the enslaved to be sub-human to cement his belief that slaves are better off enslaved. All in all, *Swallow Barn* was an effective antidote to abolitionism. Case in point, the American Civil War broke out shortly after its republish thanks to this book and other deceptive pieces of southern literature. 

## Works Cited

Katowich, James. “Abolitionism and the Printed Word: Pro- and Anti-Slavery Discourse in the Antebellum U.S.” Southern Literature, 12 January 2021, Arkansas School for Math, Science, and the Arts, Hot Springs. PowerPoint Presentation. 

Kennedy, John P. *Swallow Barn, or A Sojourn in the Old Dominion \\[Extracts]. George P. Putnam, 1851, Swallow Barn, or A Sojourn in the Old Dominion [Extracts]: Electronic Edition*, utc.iath.virginia.edu/abolitn/abfijpka1t.html. 